# Mars Rover-Group 2

## Sensor Findings

All sensor data was gathered at 2:00 P.M. on Friday December 1st, 2023 at the parking lot of Ralph Korte Stadium in Edwardsville, Illinois. An arduino DHT-11 sensor was used in conjunction with onboard sensors. In order to synchronize the start of the sensors, the time between powering the rover and beginning the waypoint run was minimized to only a few seconds. The following are analyses of the gathered data for each sensor.

### GPS Altitude

The altitude from the GPS sensor is relative to sea level and is pulled from the GPS and mission planner software. When compared to the readings from [calcmaps](https://www.calcmaps.com/map-elevation/), the readings seem to be fairly off. One worthy note of detail is that the initial altitude seems to be very high, before it suddenly drops down. It is possible this is due to the sensor still finding its position. During the initial start up of the rover, ten to twenty minutes were used to let the GPS find itself. On mission planner, this was visible by the rover seemingly jumping from place to even though it was stationary. It is possibly that because the rover was turned on, it was armed, and its pathing was initialezed within seconds of each other, that the GPS was still finding itsself. In future tests, it may be possible to prevent this by giving the rover a minimum of five minutes between start-up and initalizing.  

### BARO Altitude and Pressure

Altitude was recorded by the GPS and BARO sensors. The BARO sensor uses a zero altitude position as the initial point and uses pressure changes to determine the altitude. This can be seen in the inverse relationship between its altitude and pressure readings. A source for the ground truth was found on [calcmaps](https://www.calcmaps.com/map-elevation/). Looking only at the waypoint positions, the error is very small. More exact values can be found in column Y of the Navio Data file. A possible consideration to enhance the accuracy further could be in the relation of the altitude and the pressure readings. The pressure changes are used to determine the altitude changes. The day the test was conducted it was windy outside with infrequent gusts. It is possible the wind gusts could alter the air pressure in slight ways and therefore could lead to inacurate readings. If readings on the wind speed were gathered, it may be possible to utilize Bernouli's principle and subtract the pressure caused by the wind, which would in turn lead to a more accurate altitude reading.

### DHT-11

DHT-11 data was only recorded for 301 seconds of the total run. This is likely due to a wire disconnection like observed in a test runs. To prevent this in the future, connections to the breadboard may be taped in place. When looking at the data, we see a recorded range of 14.3 to 13.3 degrees Celsius. From the following [link](https://www.visualcrossing.com/weather/weather-data-services/Edwardsville,%20Il/metric/2023-12-01/2023-12-01#), for temperature in the area during the time frame of testing from 2:00 P.M. to 3:00 P.M., a ground value of 13 degrees celsius can be used. From this, we can say that the DHT-11 is fairly accurate in it's temperature readings. As far as humidity, it appears to also be accurate to data found from [weather stations](https://www.localconditions.com/weather-edwardsville-illinois/62025/past.php). A potential way to improve this already functional sensor would be to utilize a second DHT-11 sensor placed in another location outside the rover so two values for temperature can be recorded and averaged.

### BARO and IMU Temperature 

The BARO temperature sensor, like the DHT-11, senses the surrounding ambient temperature; however, since the BARO is in close proximity to the IMU, you notice that the IMU temperature and Baro temperature are practically overlapping with each other. To deal with this discrepancy, you should program the software of your navio to subtract the IMU temperature from your BARO and affect the hardware of your system so the BARO has better access to notice the ambient temperature instead of being insulated in the rover.

## Waypoints

The displacement from the expected path was monitored in NTUN.XTrack. The average absolute deviation was found to be 0.154 meters by adding taking the average of the absolute values for each recorded deviation. There was a maximum deviation of 1.95 meters. The next maximum deviation was 0.57 meters. Both of these errors were preceded by the only right turns conducted during the rover's operation, leading to an idea; if the error is greatest after each right turn, then the rover has an issue turning right. After disassembling, it was noticed that one of the motor housings had broken. The breakage was around one of the mounting screws. It is possible for this breakage to cause problems with torques in only one direction, which could explain why the error reached its top two maximums only during its right turns.

The distances from the next waypoint was also recorded. The total distance traveled was found to be 165.34 meters. It was able to travel this distance in 17 minutes and 17 seconds. This distance is greater than the projected 160 meters based on the path setting. It is still possible for this to be true because the rover's slight swerving and overcorrecting leads to further distance needed for completion. The swerving was originally reduced with Position Integral Derivative (PID) adjustments. The position was first adjusted so the rover would stay in the right direction. An appropriate value was determined to be 0.5. The integral was adjusted next so the error sum would minimize. Having this too high resulted in an oscilitory motion around the expected path, so it was placed at 0.02. Finally, the derivitive was left alone due to advisement from Brandon Hickey, so it was at 0. These steps were taken to minimize the difference between the total and projected distances. The extra 5 meters may be mostly due to the motor housing breakage. As stated earlier, the breakage could have resulted in the major deviations. By reducing the deviations with a more stable motor housing, it may have been possible to reduce the total distance traveled even further.
